---
layout: post
title:  "On Code"
date:   2016-09-07 11:00:00
---

Coding is writing a story that does something. It starts out small with very particular instructions flipping very particular bits, but the effects of automation bloom rapidly. It takes as much effort to write ten-thousand instructions as it does one million. It is a force multiplier, and an art.

My design motif is much like the actor paradigm. Individuals, each with hidden internal state, communicate with each other. How do they best communicate to accomplish a particular task? What information should they share and not share? What happens if one individual leaves unexpectedly? And what if they come back?

I describe where information comes from, who it goes to, and how it's transferred and transformed. I look at systems around me and see how they best fit togethe. What would be most stable? Stability to me is beautiful, and this aesthetic is one I've acquired only through coding.

Often the act of coding in itself is tedious and dull. At best I can find ways to write less code, typically through application of previously written code. I have a minimum bound of tedium I must endure. My memory only works so well, and I must learn better tools to improve my craft. 

My search process: look for any possible improvements over time, but only fix those problems which underly many others. Course-correcting toward underlying problems solves many issues at once and sails you further into the future without conflict. Your solution space is constrained only by the tools you use to shape your environment; a bulldozer takes you further than a shovel in most cases. Force multipliers are the only tools worth building. Everything else is minutae. With practice your mastery of information is honed into a fine chisel that cleaves the stone of multitude one stroke at a time.

A true artist observes the whole while creating the parts, and so I must with code and the product it creates. In which ways is it to be valuable? Which problems should I pay the most attention to? From inside I look out and see which issues are blocking me from seeing reality. The more truth I know of reality, the more clearly I see. Knowing reality allows me to better course-correct. Knowing reality makes me stronger. I can anticipate and avoid more obstacles, solve bigger problems.

Skill in craftsmanship allows me to appreciate other areas of my life. With mindfulness I can translate skill in one art into skill in others. Thus it gives me the core mental tools to grow as a human.

It is often easier to think in pictures. A massively parallel graphics processor operates much more effectively on a certain class of problems than a single methodical calculator. The calculator is best at processing streams of numbers, and the graphics processor is best at rapidly relating. Software is best designed through relating.

We are the brain unraveling. We are the brain creating, however we can, in our fight for survival. We'd keep it all inside to most purely observe, but find ourselves bursting with residual energy from processes which release more energy than we put in. We must create. Creation is an interaction, even if only between pen and paper, and if we do not interact we will perish forgotten and alone. Still, there comes a time when all has been learned from a current frame of reference, and effort must be made to find a better one with more to teach. The unravelling propels us. It enforces order and consideration. It guides us toward stability.

The desire for truth is hard sometimes. Being wrong hurts and learning truth requires being wrong often. I can guide someone to the truth as best I can, but I cannot know the truth. If one knows more I can dragged by their undertow, bumping into rough truths along the way.

Typically my confidence is the first false truth to go. If I am not totally confident I am correct, I can lag or fall behind a leader. As of late, however, I have lowered my threshold for confidence. Perhaps my confidence in my skill has increased. I do not become dejected when wrong as I used to. I expect it and use it to correct my course. Were I to not expect it and not learn from it I would be arrogant.

The subconcious parts of my mind know better than the aware parts. That is what I know. I can observe those parts through their actions and interact with them by nourishing and aiding them in their abstract search for stability. I observe and decipher deeper mearning. I feed them what they ask for. I listen and whenever possible I look for the underlying needs. I address those. I course-correct. I multiply my output and stabilize my surroundings. They and I are distinct, seperate, and communicate through osmosis. Yet we are one; we function as a unit. That knowledge is my confidence. I can relax and know I will do well because experience backs me up.
